policy of my method and that it might be
serviceable to people in all religions
and intending some time or other to
publish it
i would not have anything in it that
should prejudice anyone of any sect
against it i proposed writing a little
comment on each virtue
in which i would have shown the
advantages of possessing it
and the mischief's attending to its
opposite vice
and i should have called my little book
the art of
virtue because it would have shown the
means and manner
of obtaining virtue which would have
distinguished it
from the mere exhortation to be good
that does not instruct
and indicate the means but is like the
apostles man of verbal charity
who only without showing to the naked
and hungry
how or where they might clothe or
victual
extorted them to be fed and clothed
james chapter 2 verses 15 and 16
footnote nothing so likely to make a
man's fortune
as virtue and footnote
but it so happened that my intention of
writing and publishing this
comment was never fulfilled i did indeed
from time to time put down short hints
of the sentiments reasonings etc to be
made use of
in it some of which i have still by me
but the necessary close attention to
private business
in the earlier part of my life and
public business sense
have occasioned my postponing it for it
being
connected to my mind with a great and
extensive project
that required the whole man to execute
and which an unforeseen succession
of employees prevented my attending to
it has hitherto remained unfinished
in this piece it was my design to
explain and enforce this doctrine
that vicious actions are not hurtful
because they are forbidden
but forbidden because they are hurtful
the nature of man alone considered that
it was therefore everyone's interest
to be virtuous who wished to be happy
even in this world and i should from
this circumstance
there being always in the world a number
of rich merchants
nobility states and princes who have
need of honest instruments
for the management of their affairs and
such being
so rare have endeavored to convince
young persons
that no qualities were so likely to make
a poor man's fortune
as those of probity and integrity my
list of virtues contained at first but
twelve
but a quaker friend having kindly
informed me that i was
generally thought proud that my pride
showed itself frequently in conversation
that i was not content in being in the
right when discussing any point
but was overbearing and rather insolent
of which he
convinced me by mentioning several
instances
i determined endeavoring to cure myself
if i could of this vice or folly among
the rest
and i added humility to my list giving
an extensive meaning to the word
i cannot boast to much success in
acquiring the reality of this virtue
but i had a good deal with regard to the
appearance of it
i made it a rule to forbear all direct
contradictions
to the sentiments of others and all
positive assertion
of my own i even forbid myself agreeably
to the old laws
of arjunto the use of every word
or expression in the language that
imported a fixed opinion
such as certainly undoubtedly
etc and i adopted instead of them
i conceive i apprehend or i
imagine a thing to be so and so or it
so appears to me at present when another
asserted something that i thought
an error i denied myself the pleasure of
contradicting him abruptly
and of showing immediately some
absurdity in his proposition
and in answering i began by observing
that in certain cases or circumstances
his opinion would be right but in the
present case
there appeared or seemed to me some
differences
etc i soon found the advantage of this
change in my manner
the conversations i engaged in went more
pleasantly
the modest way in which i proposed my
opinions
procured them a readier exception and
less
contradictions i had less mortifications
when i was found to be in the wrong
and i more easily prevailed with others
to give up
their mistakes and join with me when i
happen to be in the right
and this mode which i am first put on
with some violence
to natural inclination became at length
so easy
and so habitual to me that perhaps for
these 50 years past
no one has ever heard a dogmatical
expression escape me
and to this habit after my character of
integrity
i think it principally owing that i had
early so much
weight with my fellow citizens when i
proposed
new institutions or alterations in the
old
and so much influence in public counsels
when i became a member
for i was but a bad speaker never
eloquent
subject to much hesitation in my choice
of words
hardly correct in language and yet i
generally carried my points
in reality there is perhaps no one of
our natural
passions so hard to subdue as pride
disguise it struggle with it beat it
down
stifle it mortify it as much as one
pleases
it is still alive and will every now and
then peep out and show itself
you will see it perhaps often in this
history for
even if i could conceive that i had
completely overcome it
i should probably be proud of my
humility
thus far written at passe 1784
footnote i am now about to ride at home
august
1788 but cannot have the help expected
from my papers
many of them being lost in the war i
have however
found the following this is a marginal
memorandum
and a footnote having mentioned a great
and extensive project which i had
conceived
it seemed proper that some accounts
should be here given of that project
and its object its first rise in my mind
appeared in the following little paper
accidentally preserved these
observations of my reading history
in library may 19 1731
that the great affairs of the world the
wars revolutions etc
are carried on and affected by parties
that the view of these parties is their
present general interest
or what they take to be such that the
different views of these different
parties occasion
all confusion that while a party is
carried on
a general design each man has his
particular private interest in view
that as soon as a party has gained its
general point
each member becomes intent upon his
particular interest
which thwarting others breaks that party
into divisions
and occasions more confusion that few
in public affairs act from a mere view
of good of their country
whatever they may pretend and though
their actions bring real good to their
country
yet men primarily considered that their
own
and their country's interest was united
and did not act from a principle of
benevolence
that few still in public affairs act
with a view
to the good of mankind there seems to me
at present to be great occasion for
raising
a united party for virtue by forming the
virtuous and good men
of all nations into a regular body
to be governed by suitable good and wise
rules
which good and wise men may probably be
more
unanimous in their obedience to than
common people are
to common laws i at present to think
that whoever attempts this
a right and is well qualified cannot
fail a pleasing god
and of meeting with success be f
revolving this project in my mind has to
be undertaken here after when my
circumstances
should afford me the necessary leisure i
put down from time to time on pieces of
paper
such thoughts has occurred to me
respecting it most of these are lost
but i found one purporting to be the
substance of an intended creed
containing as i thought the essentials
of every known religion
and being free of everything that might
shock the professors of any religion
i expressed in these words feasts that
there is one god who made all things
that he governs the world by his
providence that he ought to be
worshipped by adoration
prayer and thanksgiving but that the
most acceptable service of god is doing
good to man
that the soul is immortal and that god
will certainly reward virtue and punish
vice
either here or hereafter my ideas at
that time were
that the sect should be begun and spread
at first among young
and single men only that each person to
be
initiated should not only declare his
ascent
to such creed but should have exercised
himself
with the 13 weeks examination and
practice of the virtues
as in the before mentioned model that
the existence of such a society
should be kept a secret until it was
become considerable
to prevent solicitations for the
admission of improper persons
but that the members should each of them
search among his acquaintances
for ingenious well-disposed youths to
whom
with prudent caution the scheme should
be gradually communicated
that the members should engage to afford
their advice assistance and support to
each other
in promoting one another's interests
businesses
and advancement in life that for
distinction
we should be called the society of the
free and easy
free as being by the general practice
and habit of the virtues
free from the dominion of vice and
particularly by the practice of industry
and frugality
free from debt which exposes a man to
confinement
and a species of slavery to his
creditors
this is as much as i can now recollect
of the project except that i
communicated it in parts
to two young men who adopted it with
some enthusiasm
but my then narrow circumstances and the
necessity i was under
of sticking close to my business
occasioned my postponing the further
prosecution of it
at that time and my multifarious
occupations
public and private induced me to
continue postponing
so that it has been omitted until i have
no longer
strength or activity left sufficient
for such an enterprise though i am still
of opinion
that it was a practicable scheme and
might have been very useful by forming a
great number of good citizens
and i was not discouraged by the seeming
magnitude of the undertaking as i have
always thought that one man
of tolerable abilities may work great
changes
and accomplish great affairs among
mankind
if he first forms a good plan and
cutting off all amusements or other
employments that would divert his
attention
makes the execution of that same plan
his sole study and business end of
chapter nine
the autobiography of benjamin franklin
chapter 10.
this is a librivox recording all
librivox recordings
are in the public domain for more
information or to volunteer
please visit librivox.org
the autobiography of benjamin franklin
edited by frank woodworth pine
chapter 10 poor richards almanac
and other activities
in 1732 i first published my almanac
under the name of richard saunders it
was continued by me
about 25 years commonly called
poor richard's almanac i endeavored to
make it both entertaining and useful
and it accordingly came to be in such
demand
that i reaped considerable profit from
it vending
annually near ten thousand and observing
that it was generally read scarce any
neighborhood in the province being
without it
i considered it as a proper vehicle for
conveying instruction among the common
people
who bought scarcely any other books
i therefore filled all the little spaces
that occurred between the remarkable
days in the calendar
with proverbial sentences chiefly such
as
inculcated industry and frugality as the
means of procuring wealth
and thereby securing virtue it being
more difficult for a man in want
to act always honestly as
to use hear one of those proverbs
it is hard for an empty sack to stand
upright
begin footnote the almanac at that time
was a kind of periodical
as well as a guide to natural phenomena
and the weather franklin took his title
from
poor robin a famous english almanac
and from richard saunders a well-known
almanac publisher
and a footnote these proverbs which
contained the wisdom of many ages and
nations
i assembled and formed into a connected
discourse prefixed to the almanac
of 1757 as the harangue of a wise old
man
to the people attending an auction the
bringing all these scattered councils
thus into a focus
enabled them to make greater impression
the piece being universally approved
was copied in all the newspapers of the
continent
reprinted in britain on a broadside to
be struck up in houses
two translations were made of it in
french and great numbers
bought by the clergy and gentry to
distribute gratis
among their poor parishioners and
tenants
in pennsylvania as it discouraged
useless expense in foreign
superfluities some thought it had its
share of influence in producing that
growing plenty of money
which was observable for several years
after
its publication i considered my
newspaper
also as another means of communicating
instruction
and in that view frequently reprinted
init
extraps from the spectator and other
moral writers
and sometimes published little pieces of
my own
which had been first composed for
reading in our junto
of these are a socratic dialogue tending
to prove that
whatever might be his parts and
abilities
a vicious man could not properly be
called a man of sense
and a discourse on self-denial showing
that virtue was not secure till its
practice
became a habitude and was free from the
opposition of contrary inclinations
these may be found in the papers about
the beginning
of 1735 in the conduct of my newspaper
i carefully excluded all libelling and
personal abuse
which is of late years become so
disgraceful
to our country whenever i was solicited
to insert
anything of that kind and the writers
pleaded
as they generally did the liberty of the
press
and that a newspaper was like a
stagecoach in which anyone who could pay
had a right to a place my answer was
that i would print the piece separately
if desired
and the author might have as many copies
as he pleased
to distribute himself but that i would
not
take upon me to spread his detraction
and that having contracted with my
subscribers
to furnish them with what might be
either useful or entertaining
i could not fill their papers with
private altercations
in which they had no concern without
doing them manifest injustice
now many of our printers make no scruple
of gratifying the malice of individuals
by false accusations of the fairest
characters
among ourselves augmenting animosity
even to the producing of duels and are
moreover so indiscreet as to print
screwless
reflections on the government of
neighboring states
and even on the conduct of our best
national allies
which may be attended with the most
pernicious
consequences these things i mention as a
caution to young printers
and that they may be encouraged not to
pollute their presses
and disgrace their profession by such
infamous practices
but refuse steadily as they may see by
my example
that such a course of conduct will not
on the whole
be injurious to their interests in 1733
i sent one of my journeymen to
charleston south carolina
where a printer was wanting i furnished
him with the press
and letters on an agreement of
partnership
by which i was to receive one-third of
the profits of the business
paying one-third of the expense he was a
man of learning
and honest but ignorant in matters of
account and though he sometimes made me
remittances
i could get no account from him nor any
satisfactory state of our partnership
while he lived
on his decease the business was
continued by his widow who
being born and bred in holland where as
i have been informed
the knowledge of accounts makes a part
of female education
she not only sent me as clear a state as
she could find of the transaction's past
but continued to account with the
greatest regularity and exactness
every quarter afterwards and managed the
business with such success
that she not only brought up reputably a
family of children
but at the expiration of the term was
able to purchase of
me the printing house and establish her
son in it
i mention this affair chiefly for the
sake of recommending
that branch of education for our young
females
as likely to be of more use to them and
their children in case of widowhood than
either music or dancing
by preserving them from losses by
imposition of crafty men
and enabling them to continue perhaps a
profitable mercantile house
with established correspondence till a
son has grown up
fit to undertake and go on with it to
the lasting advantage
and enriching of the family about the
year 1734
there arrived among us from ireland a
young presbyterian preacher
named hemphill who delivered with a good
voice
and apparently extemporary most
excellent discourses which drew together
considerable numbers
of different persuasions who joined in
admiring them
among the rest i became one of his
constant heroes
his sermons pleasing me as they had
little of the dog medical kind
but inculcated strongly the practice of
virtue
or what in the religious style are
called good works
those however of our congregation who
considered themselves as orthodox
presbyterians
disapproved his doctrine and were joined
by most of the old clergy
who arraigned him of heterodoxy before
the synad
in order to have him silenced i became
his
zealous partisan and contributed all i
could
to raise a party in his favor and we
combated for him a while with such hopes
of success
there was much scribbling pro and con
upon the occasion
and finding that though an elegant
preacher
he was but a poor writer i lent him my
pen
and wrote for him two or three pamphlets
and one piece in the gazette of april
1735.
those pamphlets as is generally the case
with controversial writings
though eagerly read at the time were
soon out of vogue
and i questioned whether a single copy
of them now
exists during the contest an unlucky
occurrence hurt
his cause exceedingly one of our
adversaries having heard him preach a
sermon
that was much admired thought he had
somewhere
read the sermon before or at least a
part of it
on search he found the part quoted at
length
in one of the british reviews from a
discourse of dr
foster's this detection gave many of our
party disgust
who accordingly abandoned his cause and
occasioned our more speedy discomfiture
in the synod
i stuck by him however as i rather
approved his giving us good sermons
composed by others and bad ones of his
own manufacture
though the latter was the practice of
our common teachers
he afterward acknowledged to me that
none of those he preached were his own
adding that his memory was such as
enabled him to retain
and repeat any sermon after one reading
only
on our defeat he left us in search
elsewhere of better fortune
and i quitted the congregation never
joining it
after though i continued many years my
subscription for the support
of its ministers i had begun in 1733 to
study languages
i soon made myself so much a master of
the french
as to be able to read the books with
ease i then undertook the italian
an acquaintance who was also learning it
used often to tempt me to play chess
with him
finding this took up too much of the
time i had to spare for study
i at length refused to play anymore
unless on this condition
that the victor in every game should
have a right to impose a task
either in parts of the grammar to be got
by heart
or in translations etc which tasks the
vanquished was to perform upon honor
before our next meeting
as we played pretty equally we thus beat
one another into that language
i afterwards with a little painstaking
acquired as much of the spanish
as to read their books also i have
already mentioned that i had only one
year's instruction
in a latin school and that when very
young
after which i neglected that language
entirely
but when i had attained an acquaintance
with the french italian and spanish
i was surprised to find on looking over
a latin testament
that i understood so much more of that
language than i had imagined
which encouraged me to apply myself
again to the study of it
and i met with more success as those
preceding languages
had greatly smoothed my way from these
circumstances i have thought that there
is some inconsistency in our common mode
of teaching languages
we are told that it is proper to begin
first with latin
and having acquired that it will be more
easy to attain
those modern languages which are derived
from it
and yet we do not begin with the greek
in order more easily to acquire the
latin
it is true that if you can clamber
and get to the top of a staircase
without using the steps
you will more easily gain them in
descending but certainly
if you begin with the lowest you will
more easily ascend to the top
and i would therefore offer it to the
consideration of those
who superintend the education of our
youth whether
since many of those who begin with the
latin
quit the same after spending some years
without having made any great
proficiency
and what they have learned become almost
useless
so that their time has been lost it
would not have been better
to have begun with the french proceeding
to the italian etc
for though after spending of the same
time they should quit the study of
languages and never arrive at the latin
they would however have acquired another
tongue or two
that being in modern use might be
serviceable to them in the common life
begin footnote the authority of franklin
the most eminently practical man of his
age in favor of reversing the study of
the dead languages
till the mind has reached a certain
maturity is confirmed by the confession
of one of the most eminent scholars of
any age
our seminaries of learning says given do
not exactly correspond with the precept
of a spartan king that the child should
be instructed in the arts
which will be useful to the man since a
finished scholar may emerge from the
head of westminster
or eaton in total ignorance of the
business
and conversation of english gentlemen in
the latter end of the 18th century
but these schools may assume the merit
of teaching
all that they pretend to teach the latin
and greek languages
in the footnote after 10 years absence
from boston
and having become easy in my
circumstances
i made a journey thither to visit my
relations
which i could not sooner well afford in
returning i called at newport to see my
brother
then settled there with his printing
house our former differences were
forgotten
and our meeting was very cordial and
affectionate
he was fast declining in his health and
requested of me that
in case of his death which he
apprehended not far distant
i would take home his son then but 10
years of age
and bring him up to the printing
business this i accordingly performed
sending him a few years to school before
i took him into the office
his mother carried on the business till
he was grown up
when i assisted him with an assortment
of new types
those of his father's being in a manner
worn out thus it was that i made my
brother ample amends
for the service i had deprived him of by
leaving him so early
in 1736 i lost one of my sons
a fine boy of four years old by the
smallpox
taken in the common way i long regretted
bitterly and
still regret that i had not given it to
him
by inoculation this i mentioned for the
sake of parents
who omit that operation on the
supposition that they should never
forgive themselves
if a child died under it my example
showing that the regret
may be the same either way and that
therefore
the safer should be chosen our club
the junto was found so useful and
afforded such satisfaction to the
members
that several were desirous of
introducing their friends
which could not well be done without
exceeding what we had settled as a
convenient number
these 12. we had from the beginning
made it a rule to keep our institution a
secret which was pretty well observed
the intention was to avoid applications
of improper persons
for admittance some of whom perhaps
we might find it difficult to refuse i
was one of those
who were against any addition to our
number
but instead of it made in writing a
proposal
that every member separately should
endeavor to form a subordinate club
with the same rules respecting queries
etc
and without informing them of the
connection to the junto
the advantages proposed were the
improvement of so many more young
citizens
by the use of our institutions our
better acquaintance with the general
statements
of the inhabitants on any occasion as
the junto member might propose
what queries we should desire and was to
report
that to junto what passed in his
separate club
the promotion of our particular
interests in business
by more extensive recommendation and the
increase of our influence in public
affairs
and our power of doing good by spreading
through the several clubs
the sentiment of the junta this project
was approved and every member undertook
to form his club
but they did not all succeed five or six
only were completed
which were called by different names as
the vine
the union the band etc
they were useful to themselves and
afforded us a good deal of amusement
information and instruction besides
answering in some considerable degree
our views of influencing the public
opinion on particular occasions
of which i shall give some instances in
course of time as they happen
my first promotion was my being chosen
in 1736
clerk of the general assembly this
choice was made that year without
opposition
but the year following when i was again
proposed
the choice like that of the members
being annual
a new member made a long speech against
me in order to favor some other
candidate
i was however chosen which was the most
agreeable to me
as besides the pay for the immediate
services clerk
the place gave me a better opportunity
of keeping up
an interest among the members which
secured to me
the business of printing the votes laws
paper money
and other occasional jobs for the public
that on the whole
were very profitable i therefore did not
like the opposition of this new member
who was a gentleman of fortune in
education with talents that were likely
to give him
in time great influence in the house
which
indeed afterwards happened i did not
however aim at gaining his favor by
paying any servile respect to him
but after some time took this other
method
having heard that he had in his library
a certain very scarce
and curious book i wrote a note to him
expressing my desire
of perusing that book and requesting he
would do me the
favor of lending it to me for a few days
he sent it immediately and i returned it
in about a week
with another note expressing strongly my
sense of the favor
when we next met in the house he spoke
to me
which he had never done before and with
great civility
and he ever after manifested a readiness
to serve me on all occasions so that we
became great friends
and our friendship continued to his
death this is another instance of the
truth of an old maxim
i had learned which says he that has
once done you a kindness
will be more ready to do you another
than he whom you
yourself have obliged and it shows how
much more profitable
it is prudently to remove than to
resent return and continue imicable
proceeding
in 1737 colonel spotwood late governor
of
virginia and then postmaster general
being dissatisfied with the conduct of
his deputy in philadelphia
respecting some negligence in rendering
and in exactitude of his accounts
took from him the commission and offered
it to me i accepted it readily
and found it of great advantage for
though the salary was small
it facilitated the correspondence that
improved my newspaper
increased the number demanded as well as
the advertisements to be inserted
so that it came to afford me a
considerable income
my old competitors newspaper declined
proportionately
and i was satisfied without retaliating
his refusal while postmaster to permit
my papers being
carried by the writers thus he suffered
greatly from his neglect in new
accounting and i mention it as a lesson
to those young men
who may be employed in managing affairs
for others
that they should always render accounts
and make remittances
with great clearness and punctuality the
character of observing such a conduct
is the most powerful of all
recommendations to new employments
and increase of business end of chapter
10.
the autobiography of benjamin franklin
chapter 11.
this is a librivox recording all
librivox recordings are in the public
domain
for more information or to volunteer
please visit librivox.org
the autobiography of benjamin franklin
edited by frank woodworth pine
chapter 11 interest in public affairs
i began now to turn my thoughts a little
to public affairs
beginning however with small matters the
city watch was one of the first things
that i conceived to want regulation it
was managed by the constables
of the respective wards in turn the
constable
warned a number of housekeepers to
attend him for the night
those who chose never to attend paid him
six shillings a year to be excused
which was supposed to be for hiring
substitutes
but was in reality much more than was
necessary for that purpose
and made the constable ship a place of
profit
and the constable for a little drink
often got such
ragamuffins about him as a watch that
respectable housekeepers
did not choose to mix with walking the
rounds too
was often neglected and most of the
nights spent in tippling
i thereupon wrote a paper to be read in
chunto
representing these irregularities but
insisting more
particularly on the inequality of the
six shillings tax
of the constables respecting the
circumstances of those who paid it
since a poor widow housekeeper all whose
property to be guarded by the watch
did not perhaps exceed the value of 50
pounds
paid as much as the wealthiest merchant
who had thousands of pounds worth of
goods in his stores
on the whole i proposed as a more
effectual watch
the hiring of proper men to serve
constantly in that business
and as a more equitable way of
supporting the charge
the levying of attacks that should be
proportioned to the property
this idea being approved by the junto
was communicated
to the other clubs but as a rising in
each of them
and though the plan was not immediately
carried into execution
yet by preparing the minds of people for
the change
it paved the way for the law obtained a
few years
after when the members of our clubs were
grown into more
influence about this time i wrote a
paper
first to be read in junto but it was
afterward published
on the different accidents and
carelessnesses by which
houses were set on fire with cautions
against them
and means proposed to avoiding them this
was much
spoken of as a useful piece and gave
rise to a project
which soon followed it of forming a
company
for the more readily extinguishing of
fires
and mutual assistance in removing and
securing of goods
when in danger associates in this scheme
were presently found amounting to 30.
our articles of agreement obliged every
member to keep always in good order
and fit for use a certain number of
leather buckets
with strong bags and baskets for packing
and transporting of goods
which were to be brought to every fire
and we agreed to meet once a month
and spend a social evening together in
discoursing and
communicating such ideas has occurred to
us
upon the subjects of fires as might be
useful
in our conduct on such occasions the
utility of this institution soon
appeared and many more desiring to be
admitted
than we thought convenient for one
company they were advised to form
another
which was accordingly done and this went
on
one new company being formed after
another till they became so numerous as
to include
most of the inhabitants who were men of
property and
now at the time of my writing this
though upwards of 50 years
since its establishment that which i
first
formed called the union fire company
still subsists and flourishes
though the first members are all
deceased but myself
and one who is older by a year than i am
the small fines that have been paid by
members for absence at a monthly meeting
have been applied to the purchase of
fire engines ladders
fire hooks and other useful implements
for each company
so that i question whether there is a
city in the world
better provided with the means of
putting a stop
to the beginning conflagrations and in
fact
since these institutions the city has
never lost by fire
more than one or two houses at a time
and the flames
have often been extinguished before the
house in which they began
has been consumed in 1739
arriving among us from ireland the
reverend mr whitfield
who had made himself remarkable there as
an itinerant preacher
he was at first permitted to preach in
some of our churches
but the clergy taking a dislike to him
soon refused him their pulpits
and he was obliged to preach in the
fields the multitudes of all sects and
denominations
that attended his sermons were enormous
and it was matter of speculation to me
who was one of the number to observe the
extraordinary
influence of his oratory on his hearers
and how much they admired and respected
him notwithstanding his common abuse of
them
by assuring them that they were
naturally half beast and half devils
it was wonderful to see the change soon
made in the manners of our inhabitants
first being thoughtless or indifferent
about religion
it seemed as if all the world were going
religious so that one could not walk
through the town in an evening
without hearing psalms sung in different
families
of every street begin footnote
george whitfield 1714 to 1770
a celebrated english clergyman and
pulpit orator
one of the founders of methodism and
footnote
and it being found inconvenient to
assemble in the open air
subject to its inclemencies the building
of a house to meet
in was no sooner proposed and persons
appointed
to receive contributions but sufficient
sums were soon received
to procure the ground and erect the
building which
was 100 feet long in 70 broad about the
size of
westminster hall and the work was
carried on with such spirit
has to be finished in a much shorter
time than could have been expected
both house and grounds were vested in
trustees
expressly for the use of any preacher of
any religious persuasion
who might desire to say something to the
people at philadelphia
the design in building not being to
accommodate any particular sect
but the inhabitants in general so that
even if the mufti of constantinople
were to send a missionary to preach
[__] to us
he would find a pulpit at his service
begin footnote a part of the palace of
westminster
now forming the vestibule to the houses
of parliament
in london and footnote mr whitfield
in leaving us went preaching all the way
through the colonies to georgia the
settlement of that province
had lately been begun but instead of
being made with
hearty industrious husbandmen accustomed
to labor
the only people fit for such an
enterprise it was with families
of broken shopkeepers and other
insolvent
debtors many of indolent and idol habits
taken out of the jails who being set
down in the woods
unqualified for clearing land and unable
to endure the hardships of a new
settlement
perished in numbers leaving many
helpless children unprovided for
the site of their miserable situation
inspired
the benevolent heart of mr whitfield
with the idea
of building an orphan house there in
which they might be supported and
educated
returning northward he preached up this
charity and
made large collections for his eloquence
had a wonderful power over the hearts
and purses of his hearers of which i
myself was an instant
i did not disapprove of the design but
as georgia was then destitute of
materials and workmen
and was proposed to send them from
philadelphia at a great expense
i thought it would have been better to
have built the houses here and brought
the children to it
thus i advised but he was resolute in
his first project
rejected my counsel and i therefore
refused to contribute
i happened soon after to attend one of
his sermons
in the course of which i perceived he
intended to finish with a collection
and i silently resolved he should get
nothing from me
i had in my pocket a handful of copper
money three or four silver dollars and
five pistols
in gold as he proceeded i began to
soften
and concluded to give the coppers
another stroke of his oratory
made me ashamed of that and determined
to give
the silver and he finished so admirably
that i emptied my pocket wholly into the
collector's dish
gold and all at this sermon there was
also one of our club
who being of my sentiments respecting
the building in georgia
and suspecting a collection might be
intended
had by precaution emptied his pockets
before he came from home
toward the conclusion of the discourse
however he felt a strong desire to give
and applied to a neighbor who stood near
him to borrow some money for the purpose
the application was unfortunately made
to perhaps the only man in the company
who had the firmness not to be affected
by the preacher
his answer was at any other time friend
hopkins and
i would lend thee freely but not now
for thee seems to be out of thy right
senses
some of mr whitfield's enemies affected
to support
that he would apply these collections to
his own private emulate
but i who was intimately acquainted with
him
being employed in printing his sermons
and journals etc
never had the least suspicion of his
integrity but
am to this day decidedly of opinion
that he was in all his conduct a
perfectly honest man
and me thinks my testimony in his favor
ought to have the more weight as we had
no religious connection
he used indeed sometimes to pray for my
conversion
but never had the satisfaction of
believing that his prayers were heard
ours was a mere civil friendship sincere
on both sides
and lasted to his death the following
instance will
show something of the terms on which we
stood
upon one of his arrivals from england at
boston
he wrote to me that he should come soon
to philadelphia but knew not where he
could lodge when there
as he understood his